doc: doc for new 'atlas migrate lint' behavior (#2072)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/versioned/lint.mdx

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

The `atlas migrate lint` command enables team members to work together on database schemas, ensuring they are synchronized

> and avoiding stepping on each other's toes. Atlas also analyzes new schema changes in the migration directory that might

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and avoid stepping on each other's toes. Atlas analyzes new schema changes in the migration directory that might
```

be dangerous, violate best practices, or break the team's policies. Learn more about [Atlas's analyzers](/lint/analyzers).

While this command is commonly used locally, migration linting is frequently incorporated into CI pipelines, allowing
teams to detect changes early before merging them into the main branch. Learn more on how to integrate Atlas into
your [GitHub Actions](/cloud/setup-ci) or [GitLab](/guides/ci-platforms/gitlab) CI pipelines.

### Flags

When using `migrate lint` to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:
* `--dev-url` - [URL](/concepts/url) to a [Dev-database](/concepts/dev-database) that will be used
 to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.
* `--dir` - URL of the migration directory, by default it is `file://migrations`, e.g a
 directory named `migrations` in the current working directory.
* `--web` / `-w` (optional) - open the lint report in the browser.

### Changeset detection

> When we run the `lint` command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide what set of migration files to analyze.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we run the `lint` command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide which set of migration files to analyze.
```

Currently, three ways are supported. Let's go over them one by one:

#### Compare against the latest state of the migration directory

> Teams that connected their project to Atlas Cloud (see [setup](/cloud/setup-ci) for more details), can simply run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teams that have connected their project to Atlas Cloud (see [setup](/cloud/setup-ci) for more details), can simply run
```

the following command to analyze the changes detected by comparing the **local state** of the migration directory

> to the **latest state** as defined in Atlas Cloud. For example, either by running `atlas migrate push` or by connecting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the **latest state**, as defined in Atlas Cloud. For example, either by running `atlas migrate push` or by connecting
```

it to a CI pipeline.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="mysql" label="MySQL">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "docker://mysql/8/dev" \
  -w
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="maria" label="MariaDB">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "docker://mariadb/latest/dev" \
  -w
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="postgres" label="PostgreSQL">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "docker://postgres/15/test?search_path=public" \
  -w
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlite" label="SQLite">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "sqlite://file?mode=memory" \
  -w
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::info Preventing non-additive changes

> By using this method, Atlas also warns you if your local migration directory is not up-to-date with the latest state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using this method, Atlas warns you if your local migration directory is not up-to-date with the latest state
```

> of the project and rebase is required. For example, while working on a feature branch, another team member might have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the project and rebasing is required. For example, while working on a feature branch, another team member might have
```

pushed a new migration file to the main branch.
:::

Here is an example of how a report of `atlas migrate lint` looks like:

![CI for schema changes](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/lint-report-non-additive.png)

#### Analyze the latest N migration files

Users can instruct Atlas to analyze the latest N migration files by running `atlas migrate lint --latest N`:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="mysql" label="MySQL">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "docker://mysql/8/dev" \
  --latest 1
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="maria" label="MariaDB">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "docker://mariadb/latest/dev" \
  --latest 1
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="postgres" label="PostgreSQL">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "docker://postgres/15/test?search_path=public" \
  --latest 1
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="sqlite" label="SQLite">

```shell
atlas migrate lint \
  --dev-url "sqlite://file?mode=memory" \
  --latest 1
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> Similar to the previous method, the `-w`/`--web` can be used to open the report in the browser, see the changes in ERD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to the previous method, the `-w`/`--web` can be used to open the report in the browser, see the changes in ERD
```

format, and more.

#### Compare against a specific branch

> Users can instruct Atlas to detect what are the changes to analyze by comparing the current branch to a specific branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can instruct Atlas to detect which changes to analyze by comparing the current branch to a specific branch.
```
